---
title: "What do we really love?"
date: 2022-04-16T10:17:11-06:00
tags: ["philosophy", "memory", "instinct"]
draft: false
---

Went hiking to a nearby park. Bit cold and it's pretty soon that my face was numbed. Birds sang their morning songs with no stop. On the top, the white peaks of rocky mountians in the west are clear to see. But no one to see but birds. 

Memory is clearly somewhere in our brain. When we remember something, it's somehow printed hard there. If you practise, anything like jogging, swimming, basketball, guitar, violin, or piano, you know how the muscle memory is there. Perhaps in your brain, but also in your legs, arms, and fingers. In this sense, I believe the dualism of mind and body is a false statement. You just cannot distiguish between what is mind and what is body, because they are just indispensable parts of a life. Can you draw a line like a border? No. Do not try to separate them.

Our body has more than consciousness. It is like a chemical factory running without our knowing anything about it. Our feeelings, our reactions, our desires, and our reasonings are not under our will. They are our will, yet we have no control over them. I believe when we are aging and dying, we are losing the chemical drives little by little. We are chaning all the time. That's why it is really hard to know who we are.

Imagine a pack of wild wolves. They fight. They hunt. They live. They die. It is one wolf before the nature, together with other wolves within a pack. We are alone facing the nature. Then we have a comunity and grow a culture around. We watch. We explore. We read. We inherit a common sense of the society in one language or more. What you can do and what you cannot. Are those the filters and shapers of our desire? Perhaps. The point is that thoughts we may not show and things we may not do are just the surface of our desires, those chemicals running deep in our body.

On my way back, say hello to the birds and pat a dog for the first time. I can feel its eagerness to sniff my hands and its strength to play with me. Then wave goodbye to this lady. This is life.

