---
title: "different forms of power?"
date: 2023-04-16T10:15:29-06:00
tags: ["suffering", "history", "capitalism"]
draft: false
---

In my backyard, there are always bird dramas going on and on. As you may know that birds are territorial animals. One year, a robin couple fought with another couple of black crow because somehow the black crow stole their chick and ate it. the poor robins called all their friends and had a fight on the garage's roof. This spring, two Magpies built their nest on the apple tree. The construction took about a month. Now both are busy for internal decrations. 

We human being are territorial animals too. In old days, people fight over the land and the sea. The history is mainly the history of wars and violence over the ownership of land and sea. The power takes the form of land ownership, the gold and the silver, and the money. Now the capital is the power both physically and digitally.

"The problem with capitalism is that if you are not born into wealth, your only capital is your labor. So automatically, your human body, is now a commodity that you must sell, and if you cannot sell it for enough, you won't be able to care for it and will lose your capital." Still the capitalism convinced you that your are a capitalist too so that you think and act in ways that benefit it. The real power comes from eveyone.

Looking at the history, there are changes and permanences. The structure of power is always one class over another. More or less the suffering of the oppressed is unchanged like forever. Your only hope is that you would have less. But who knows? 

