---
title: "a part of power: you and me"
date: 2023-11-24T15:40:14-07:00
tags: ["ukraine", "palestine"]
draft: false
---

Most of people will side with the power to survive, not the truth, not the beauty, not the kids because the society is structured with power. I have to say that there are definitely a few exceptions out there. They are the light in the darkness and the hope out of desperation.

On March 31, 2023 at online Bucha Summit, Secretary Blinken commented as follow: "One year ago today, when Ukrainian forces liberated Bucha, they discovered a massacre.  Hundreds of men, women, and children killed indiscriminately by Russian forces." So Blinken is talking about to hold Russia accountable for its war crime in Ukraine. 

After the terrorist attack on Oct 7, 2023 by Hamas, most of the western countries stand with Israel. However, the things start to change. To defend yourself and to fight the terrorists, can you use the same terrorist approach? There are thousands of kids killed in the air-strike by Israel. Are they just the price of war against terrorism? I really doubt it. These chilldren are killed indiscriminately by Israel. However, most leaders of western countries do not see it that way. They stand with Israel, including President Zelensky.
 
The double-standard is pretty clear. Will this give a second chance of Trump? I hope not.

To be clear, I stand with Ukraine and Palestine and I am against terrorism by both Hamas and IDF.

P.S. If you were a part of power structure, you would be covered by the power regardless of your skin color. If you were not, then you would be on your luck like Palestinian kids. 

* [王明远:再论巴以问题的几个谎言和怪论](http://xys.org/xys/ebooks/others/science/dajia24/palestine5.txt) 

* [王明远:胡耀邦属于未来的中国](http://www.xys.org/xys/ebooks/others/science/dajia22/huyaobang.txt)
    
