---
title: "the world and our mind"
date: 2023-11-10T20:32:51-07:00
tags: ["Proust", "Pessoa", "Kafka"]
draft: false
---

marcel proust (1871-1922): We fall in love for a smile, a look, a shoulder. That is enough; then, in the long hours of hope or sorrow, we fabricate a person, we compose a character. And when later on we see much of the beloved person, we can no longer, whatever the cruel reality that confronts us, strip off that good character, that nature of a woman who loves us, from the person who bestows that glance, bares that shoulder, than we can when she has grown old eliminate her youthful face from a person whom we have known since her girlhood.

fernando pessoa (1888-1935): The feelings that hurt most, the emotions that sting most, are those that are absurd: the longing for impossible things, precisely because they are impossible; nostalgia for what never was; the desire for what could have been; regret over not being someone else; dissatisfaction with the world’s existence. All these half-tones of the soul’s consciousness create a raw landscape within us, a sun eternally setting on what we are.

franz kafka (1883-1924): Dear Milena, I wish the world were ending tomorrow. Then I could take the next train, arrive at your doorstep in Vienna, and say: “Come with me, Milena. We are going to love each other without scruples or fear or restraint. Because the world is ending tomorrow.” Perhaps we don’t love unreasonably because we think we have time, or have to reckon with time. But what if we don't have time? Or what if time, as we know it, is irrelevant? Ah, if only the world were ending tomorrow. We could help each other very much.

Now let's use these three paragrahs to look at other quotes.

> “As for me, I am tormented with an everlasting itch for things remote. I love to sail forbidden seas, and land on barbarous coasts.” ― Herman Melville, Moby-Dick or, The Whale

> 那些消逝了的岁月，仿佛隔着一块积着灰尘的玻璃，看得到，抓不着。他一直在怀念着过去的一切。如果他能冲破那块积着灰尘的玻璃，他会走回去早已消逝的岁月。-- 花样年华（2000）劉以鬯(1918-2018)

