---
title: "the chances of factual truth surviving the onslaught of power are very slim"
date: 2023-12-21T14:33:58-07:00
tags: ["human"]
draft: false
---

How could Isreal army be so cruel to bomb Gaza so indiscriminately?

> Factual truth is in great danger of disappearance. It is engaged in a battle with political power, and it is the vulnerability of factual truth that makes deception possible. But this isn’t new either. Factual truth has always been in danger. It is easily manipulated and subject to censorship and abuse. Arendt cautions that factual truth is in danger of “being maneuvered out of the world for a time, and possibly forever.” “Facts and events”, she writes, “are infinitely more fragile things than axioms, discoveries, theories, which are produced by the human mind.”

> Facts can change because we live in the ever changing world of human affairs. People can be written out of history books. Monuments can be torn down. Language can change, because meaning is malleable. None of this is new either. It has always happened and will continue to happen, but it shows “how vulnerable is the whole texture of facts in which we spend our daily life…”

> Political power, she warned, will always sacrifice factual truth for political gain. But the side effect of the lies and the propaganda is the destruction of the sense by which we can orient ourselves in the world; it is the loss of both the commons and of common sense.

> As Arendt herself realized, telling the truth in the public sphere is very dangerous.

> Hannah Arendt: “Let truth be told though the world may perish?”

Source: [Hannah Arendt and the politics of truth by Samantha Rose Hill](https://www.opendemocracy.net/en/transformation/hannah-arendt-and-politics-truth/)

