---
title: "20240226"
date: 2024-02-26T07:29:52-07:00
tags: ["hope"]
draft: false
---

## Aaron and Gaza

Last Sunday, Airman Aaron Bushnell set himself on fire by Israeli Embassy in D.C. to protest US invovlvement in Gaza genocide. He died later after being transported to a local hospital on Sunday afternoon. What are we doing to stop the Gaza war?  

> "My name is Aaron Bushnell, I am an active-duty member of the United States Air Force and I will no longer be complicit in genocide," he says in a video of the incident. "I am about to engage in an extreme act of protest, but compared to what people have been experiencing in Palestine at the hands of their colonizers, it's not extreme at all. This is what our ruling class has decided will be normal."

## AI, Nvidia, and programming

> At the World Government Summit in Dubai, Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang presented a radical viewpoint, diverging from the traditional tech industry stance that coding is an essential skill for the younger generation. Contrary to prior tech executive advice, Huang suggested that the advent of artificial intelligence (AI) has made programming skills redundant, advocating instead for a focus on fields like biology, education, and farming. He envisions a future where AI handles coding, allowing humans to communicate with computers in natural language, effectively making everyone a programmer without the need to learn coding languages.

It seems to me an AI bubble is in the making, leading by the OpenAI drama and Nvidia becoming the third in the market value. Others related to Nvidia or AI such as ARM, Microsoft, and so on are alll rising.

## PCB, design, and soldering

The early warming this year, over 10°C in late Jan and early Feb, might give me a false hope. I might be able to solder something in my garage. So I went ahead to design some PCB and order some components. After lunar new year, they are trickling in one after another, now it is minus 20°C again.

## solder on 

"And so we beat on, boats against the current, borne back ceaselessly into the past." Right?

