---
title: "Hegelian Dialectics"
date: 2024-10-04T10:35:28-06:00
tags: ["diatectics", "Hegel"]
draft: false
---

## dialectics

Kant: Kant’s critical philosophy utilized dialectics to challenge metaphysical claims and to propose that reality is shaped by our perceptions.

German idealists: Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel further developed this idea, using dialectics to delve into the nature of being and knowledge itself. Hegel’s dialectic, in particular, is famous for its thesis-antithesis-synthesis progression.

* Thesis: A proposition or an idea is put forward, starting the dialectical process.
* Antithesis: This initial idea is then countered with an opposing view or critique.
* Synthesis: Through the clash of thesis and antithesis, a new understanding (the synthesis) emerges, which in turn becomes a new thesis for further exploration.

This triadic structure is not just a rigid formula; it’s a dynamic process that promotes the evolution of thought. It’s been applied in philosophy, sociology, literature, and even in everyday problem-solving.

Hegel was a prominent figure in the philosophical movement known as German Idealism—a philosophical perspective that asserts the primacy of ideas, consciousness, or the mind in shaping and understanding reality.

It holds that the ultimate nature of reality is rooted in ideas, concepts, or mental constructs rather than in material substances.

In other words, Idealism suggests that our understanding of the physical world is deeply influenced by our thoughts, perceptions, and interpretations, highlighting the role of the mind in shaping our experiences and knowledge.

For Hegel, reality is not just something "out there," but it includes our thoughts and consciousness as well. He saw a close relationship between our minds and the external world, where they influence and shape each other.

Hegel believed that the physical world, including the objects and substances we can perceive with our senses, is not separate from our thoughts and consciousness. He saw a close connection between our minds and the external world, where they influence and shape each other.

This interaction happens as we continually learn and grow, gaining a better grasp of ourselves and the world around us.

One of Hegel's most well-known contributions is his concept of dialectics, which is a method of reasoning and analysis that explores how opposing ideas and contradictions interact and transform into new understandings.

Hegel's dialectical approach emphasises the dynamic nature of reality and the continuous development of thought through the resolution of conflicting ideas. In other words, Hegel believed that reality is always changing, and our understanding of it grows when we find solutions to conflicting ideas.

According to Hegel, when people have different opinions or conflicting ideas (thesis and antithesis), they can engage in a process of dialogue and discussion to find a middle ground or a new perspective (synthesis) that incorporates the best elements of both sides.

This process allows for the growth of knowledge and a deeper understanding of complex issues.

It also acknowledges that conflicts and contradictions are not obstacles but rather catalysts for intellectual progress, fostering new insights and a more profound grasp of the truth.

In essence, the Hegelian dialectic is a method for resolving disagreements and advancing knowledge by engaging in thoughtful conversations, considering opposing perspectives, and seeking common ground.

[One interesting article found on substack](https://www.themodernenquirer.com/p/understanding-the-hegelian-dialectic).

## indifferent and irrelevant

will irrelevancy lead to indifference?

## Ordinary world, Duran Duran

```
Papers in the roadside
Tell of suffering and greed
Fear today, forgot tomorrow
Ooh, here besides the news
Of holy war and holy need
Ours is just a little sorrowed talk
```

