---
title: "usa and haiku"
date: 2024-06-28T13:37:12-06:00
tags: ["USA", "haiku", "Anatole France"]
draft: false
---

## USA

Last night two old men debated to show their incompetence. Too old and too bad.

Today, "The Supreme Court on Friday reduced the authority of executive agencies, sweeping aside a longstanding legal precedent that required courts to defer to the expertise of federal administrators in carrying out laws passed by Congress." And, "Conservatives have now completed their generational goals of overturning Abortion, Affirmative Action, and Chevron. If y'all don't think Obergefell and gay marriage is next on the chopping block, you must read ..."

The debate was depressing. This ruling is depressing too. The damage from this will be immeasurable in the long run.

## Haiku

```
露の世は
露の世ながら
さりながら
-- 小林一茶(1763-1828) Kobayashi Issa
```

```
古池や
蛙飛びこむ
水の音
-- 松尾芭蕉(1644-1694) Matsuo Bashō
```

```
分け入つても
分け入つても
青い山
-- 種田山頭火(1882-1940) Santōka Taneda
```

## Anatole france

> “We have never heard the devil's side of the story, God wrote all the book.”

> “To know is nothing at all; to imagine is everything.”

> “The law, in its majestic equality, forbids rich and poor alike to sleep under bridges, to beg in the streets, and to steal their bread.”

> “If we don't change, we don't grow. If we don't grow, we aren't really living.”

> “If the path be beautiful, let us not ask where it leads.”

> “In art as in love, instinct is enough. ”

> “It is the certainty that they possess the truth that makes men cruel.”

> “The whole art of teaching is only the art of awakening the natural curiosity of the mind for the purpose of satisfying it afterwards.”

> “Stupidity is far more dangerous than evil, for evil takes a break from time to time, stupidity does not.”

> “A person is never happy except at the price of some ignorance.”

> “For a man’s life would become intolerable, if he knew what was going to happen to him. He would be made aware of future evils, and would suffer their agonies in advance, while he would get no joy of present blessings since he would know how they would end. Ignorance is the necessary condition of human happiness, and it has to be admitted that on the whole mankind observes that condition well. We are almost entirely ignorant of ourselves; absolutely of others. In ignorance, we find our bliss; in illusions, our happiness.”

> “We do not know what to do with this short life, yet we yearn for another that will be eternal.”

> “We chase dreams and embrace shadows.”

> “All the good writers of confessions, from Augustine onwards, are men who are still a little in love with their sins.”


