---
title: "Adam Wolff on debugging FB-Chat"
date: 2024-02-28T10:19:41-07:00
tags: ["software debugging"]
draft: false
---

Today [Adam Wolff](https://github.com/wolffiex) tweeted [a story about deugging FB-Chat](https://twitter.com/dmwlff/status/1762885255030259854). He is a technical fellow at Electric Capital. Below is it.

> Before the major effort to redo the UI, FB Chat was super broken and we had no idea why.

> We didn’t know what was wrong, but we knew the code was a mess. We set about rewriting both the front-end and the back-end in an effort to fix it.

> The front-end rewrite pulled in a whole team of amazing engineers and became one of the big threads that led to reactjs.

> During the time we were working on the Chat rewrite, we were also replacing the original Erlang backend with one written in C++. This was probably a good move, but the problem wasn’t with Erlang either.

> When we finally gained insight into our deliverability data, we were able to cut it by region. We noticed Chat was really popular in India. This was before WhatsApp, at a time when SMS wasn’t reliable.

> Eventually we pinpointed a region in India where one specific DNS provider was giving out the wrong IP addresses for our Chat servers. So when people went to use Chat, they would sometimes get a notification that they had a message, and then it would disappear. Or they’d send a message and it would get lost. All because they were connecting to the wrong IP address.

> That was it! None of the sexy new tech we were working on was going to solve that problem. Ever.

