---
title: "cheese bread and the market"
date: 2024-10-25T12:08:36-06:00
tags: ["cem Karsan", "Ronald Coase", "Fredric Jameson"]
draft: false
---

## cheese bread

Made some cheese bread. the dough has a bit of cheese. the crust is thin with olive oil applied at the top. A little salt to add favor. Then a layer of cheese on the top. Bake it to golden top. You have a crusty top and edge with layered and soft internals.

## Cem Karsan on market volatility

He build his models to profit on the volatility of the market. I am not sure I understand all his points. But I agree that the fundamental structre of the market, the human nature and the season of the year drive the volatility. The election, the interest rate, the wars and many other events and data just change the direction of the flow.

## Ronald Harry Coase (1910-2013), 1991 Nobel laureate in Economics

"If you torture the data enough, nature will always confess."

The bias in statistics are human bias, for sure.

## the history of philosophy

"The history of philosophy is not a history of ideas: it is a history of problems. The Critique of Pure Reason is a critique, and it is a critique of types of knowledge. It raises all kinds of problems, and suddenly all those problems lead to an efflorescence of philosophical thought. After Kant come the Hegelian schools, to one of which Marx belongs, and by the time you get to 1850, suddenly all of Hegelianism is eclipsed by a very old book, written at practically the same time as Hegel’s early works, which is by Schopenhauer. Schopenhauer’s work, along with Lange’s history of materialism, suddenly eclipse all that came before them and lead us into a new period of German thought dominated by Nietzsche." 
-- The Years of Theory by Fredric Jameson

