---
title: "the value of crises"
date: 2025-06-20T10:14:25-06:00
tags: ["notes", "顿悟", "crisis", "power"]
draft: false
---

## the value of crises

A crisis doesn’t build character; it reveals it. Nations, like individuals, reveal themselves at times of crisis.

> All truth passes through three stages. First, it is ridiculed. Second, it is violently opposed. Third, it is accepted as being self-evident. -- Arthur Schopenhauer

## What is power? 

An individuall's capacity to modify others' states by providing or withholding resources or administering punishments. Resources can be social such as friendship, opportunities, or knowledge or materail such as money, job and so on. The value of power is reflected in how dependent the individual is on those resources. The principle of lease interest: the people who has the least interest in a relationship has the greatest power.

* reward: promise of rewards, monetary or otherwise
* coercion: punishment or intimidation
* legitimate or position power: holding a status of authority such as boss, minister, mother, surgeon, etc.
* expert
* referent
* informational

### Outliners in a society are always punished one way or another. 

The struggle of power is out there all the time.

### Footprints and shapes of power

### the power of psychology: values

### the power of organizations: the power tends to corrupt

* Karen Lemmey, Tobias Wofford, and Grace Yasumura, The Shape of Power: Stories of race and American sculpture, 2024

## three oil crises

### [First: 1973 October](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1973_oil_crisis)

* 禁運持續了將近一年，到1974年3月正式結束。禁運期間，全球石油價格上漲了近300%，從每桶3美元升至近12美元

* 1971年8月15日，美國單方面退出了Bretton Woods system。美國放棄了Gold standard。
US dollar as reserve currency.

### Second: 1979 oil crisis

* A drop in oil production in the wake of the Iranian revolution led to an energy crisis in 1979.

* [wiki 1979 oil crisis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1979_oil_crisis)

* 原油价格从1979的每桶15美元上涨到1981年2月的39美元

### [Third 1990 oil price shock occurred in response to the Iraq invasion of Kuwait on August 2, 1990](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1990_oil_price_shock)

* 当时3个月内原油从每桶14美元，涨到突破40美元。但高油价持续时间并不长,原油价格从7月底的每桶21美元上涨到10月中旬的每桶46美元,油价暴涨只持续了9个月就平息了下来

