---
title: "another effect of climate change"
date: 2025-12-05T09:15:16-07:00
tags: ["climate change", "dillo-browser", "hummingbird", "protobuf", "goethe", "faith", "physics", "stocks", "hitler's playbook"]
draft: false
---

> Emily Dickinson: Faith – is the Pierless Bridge / Supporting what We see / Unto the Scene that We do not

> Seamus Heaney: If we **winter** this one out, we can **summer** anywhere.

> Johann Wolfgang von Goethe: Magic is believing in yourself; if you can do that, you can make anything happen.

> Claire Keegan: “It seemed both proper and at the same time deeply unfair that so much of life was left to chance.” from Small Things Like These

> Claire Keegan: “he found himself asking was there any point in being alive without helping one another?”

## effects of climate change

if the climate changes continue, one effect is that the sea level will rise and some islands in the ocean could be submegered. that is an existential crisis for people living there. now Iceland declared that the potential collapse of a major Atlantic current system could alter the country's climate and economy. that is another effect of climate change. some places get colder and other places warmer. extreme conditions become more frequent due to climate change.

## [hummingbird spot](https://hummingbirdspot.com/)

Carole Turek has photographed more than 270 of the 366 different hummingbird species in the world. She is a retired teacher.

## [protobuf, or protocol buffer is better than JSON?](https://aloisdeniel.com/blog/better-than-json)

* API: application programming interface

An API is a set of rules that allow two systems to communicate. For example, in the web, REST APIs use the HTTP protocol and its methods (GET, PUT, POST, DELETE ...) to communicate. A request message may contain a header, a body and a response status. Inside the header, there is a field of ```Content-Type``` that specifies the message format such as JSON, XML, Protobuf, etc. **Serialization** is a process that turns a data structure into a sequence of bytes that can be transmitted.

* why JSON is so popular?

  * human readable
  * perfectly integrated into the web
  * flexible
  * tools everywhere

With JSON, you often send ambiguous or non-guaranteed data. you may encounter a missing field, an incorrect type, a typo in a key, or simply an undocumented structure. With Protobuf, that's impossible. 

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

message User {
  int32 id = 1;
  string name = 2;
  string email = 3;
  bool isActive = 4;
}
```

Each field has a strict type, a number identifier, and a stable name.

* code generation for protobuf

```
protoc --dart_out=lib user.proto
final user = User()
  ..id = 42
  ..name = "Alice"
  ..email = "alice@example.com"
  ..isActive = true;

final bytes = user.writeToBuffer();       // Binary serialization
final sameUser = User.fromBuffer(bytes);  // Deserialization
```

It works with Dart, TypeScript, Kotlin, Swift, C#, Go, Rust, and many more. no manual validation required.

Another strength of Protobuf is that it's a binary format. Easy and efficient for serialization.

## [dillo browser](https://dillo-browser.org/)

dillo is a fast and small graphical web browser

* multiplatform (linux, BSD, macOS, etc.)
* written in C and C++
* low memory usage
* support for HTTP, HTTPS, FTP and local files
* extensible
* GPLv3

## Albert Einstein, and modern physics

爱因斯坦的相对论，是奠定了宇宙宏观尺度的地基和框架（引力、时空几何、宇宙学）。而玻尔、海森堡、薛定谔、狄拉克等人创建的量子力学，则是奠定了微观世界的地基和框架。从影响力来看，相对论和量子力学的影响辐射到几乎所有物理分支，甚至哲学。

霍金的成就主要体现在黑洞物理学和宇宙学领域，其伟大之处在于他将广义相对论与量子力学理论相结合，做出了开创性的工作。其理论贡献如下：一，奇点定理：与罗杰·彭罗斯一起，霍金证明了在广义相对论的框架下，宇宙必然起源于一个“奇点”（一个密度和时空曲率无限大的点），这为现代宇宙大爆炸理论提供了坚实的数学基础。二，霍金辐射：这是他最富盛名的成就。他通过理论计算发现，黑洞并非“只进不出”，而是会因为量子效应在事件视界附近辐射出粒子，从而导致质量损失，最终可能“蒸发”殆尽。这一发现统一了广义相对论、量子力学和热力学，是迈向“量子引力理论”的关键一步。它解决了黑洞热力学中的一个核心矛盾，即黑洞应该有熵和温度，霍金辐射从理论上证明了这一点。三，无边界提议：关于宇宙起源的一个猜想。他认为宇宙的诞生没有所谓的“边界条件”，就像地球的南极一样，是时空的一个平滑点，而非奇点。这是一个深刻的宇宙学思想。

## trading stocks like fishing

we do not know the future like we do not know fish. fish follow nature's clock, not ours. the innate pace of market is unknown to us and it is dynamic, cyclic and interactive between politics, economics and market participants. 

before casting the line, we may study the company's business and the historical data and try to recognize some patterns in the backward. then we try to guess and bet the future of one company. after casting the line, we wait patiently and hope the best because we know and believe time will work out everything for us. that is all you need to know about the trading of stocks.

## [Hitler's playbook](https://phdn.org/archives/www.ess.uwe.ac.uk/documents/osssection3pt1.htm)

His primary rules were: never allow the public to cool off; never admit a fault or wrong; never concede that there may be some good in your enemy; never leave room for alternatives; never accept blame; concentrate on one enemy at a time and blame him for everything that goes wrong; people will believe a big lie sooner than a little one; and if you repeat it frequently enough people will sooner or later believe it.

(27) He has the "never say die" spirit. After some of his severest setbacks he has been able to get his immediate associates together and begin making plans for a "come-back". Events which would crush most individuals, at least temporarily, seem to act as stimulants to greater efforts in Hitler.

## word and writing

* cut

But it **cut** him, all the same, to see one of his own so upset by the sight of what other children craved and he could not help but wonder if she’d be brave enough or able for what the world had in store. -- Claire Keegan, Small things like these

* bite

Positano bites deep. It is a dream place that isn’t quite real when you are there and becomes beckoningly real after you have gone. -- John Steinbeck

波西塔诺深深地影响着你。它是一个梦幻之地，你不会轻易相信它是真实存在的，直到你离开后，它才变得栩栩如生

* winter and summer, noun as verb

“If we winter this one out, we can summer anywhere.” -- Seamus Heaney

## booklist

* [The Things She Carried: A Cultural History of the Purse in America by Kathleen B. Casey, 2025, Oxford Univ. Press](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/the-things-she-carried-9780197587829?cc=ca&lang=en&#)

* [Whiskerology: The Culture of Hair in Nineteenth-Century America by Sarah Gold McBrid, 2025, Harvard Univ. Press](https://www.hup.harvard.edu/books/9780674249295)

## [the last useful man](https://www.metropolitanreview.org/p/the-last-useful-man) the distinction between **know of** and **know how**.

> One can’t help but imagine the 20th-century philosophers Gilbert Ryle and Maurice Merleau-Ponty watching on proudly as a new generation takes up the work of undoing Cartesian dualism, **the separation of mind and body** they both saw as **the original sin of analytic philosophy**.

> It was Ryle who, in 1945, formulated the distinction that runs through Cruise’s films: that between knowledge of and knowledge how. The former was propositional, the sort you can articulate in neat, explicit statements. The latter was practical aptitude, the kind only revealed by competent action. Crucially, you can possess the latter without the former; knowing how does not entail being able to explain it. Donloe, crouched over a live nuclear bomb in Final Reckoning, gives the idea its best cinematic gloss. “Where’d you learn to do this?” asks his colleague, watching nervously. “Never said I did,” he replies.

> In 1945, Maurice Merleau-Ponty also published The Phenomenology of Perception, in which he put forward an even simpler argument: to draw any distinction between consciousness and body is nonsensical. For Merleau-Ponty, the body was not a mere vessel for the mind but a repertoire of skills built and refined through contact with the world, an inescapable part of all human thought. His thinking directly shaped the “Dreyfus Model of Skill Acquisition,” a five-stage framework for how adults progress from novice to expert, still taught everywhere from NHS wards to U.S. Air Force flight schools. I do, therefore I am. No wonder Cruise is addressed, jarringly, as “mister” six times in the film.

> In 1945, Maurice Merleau-Ponty also published <ins>The Phenomenology of Perception</ins>, in which he put forward an even simpler argument: to draw any distinction between consciousness and body is nonsensical. For Merleau-Ponty, the body was not a mere vessel for the mind but a repertoire of skills built and refined through contact with the world, an inescapable part of all human thought. His thinking directly shaped the “Dreyfus Model of Skill Acquisition,” a five-stage framework for how adults progress from novice to expert, still taught everywhere from NHS wards to U.S. Air Force flight schools. I do, therefore I am. No wonder Cruise is addressed, jarringly, as “mister” six times in the film.

## radio

* [classic WQXR](https://www.wqxr.org/)

## notes

i longed for the touch of you from this side of pacific ocean. when it is summer, there may be a time to fly back where you are. i just do not want a take-care becoming a forever. hug me once more.

