---
title: "emotional-mature or emotional intelligence"
date: 2025-06-14T13:51:35-06:00
tags: ["emotional starvation", "john pierce", "diet"]
draft: false
---

Here is [a link](https://skaldish.tumblr.com/post/680088272285941761/absolutely-because-its-an-extremely-sticky).

> I'm pretty quiet about the fact I'm a transman usually, but holy shit I need to tell you about the culture shock I'm going through because it's blindsiding me.

> There's a huge sense of social isolation that comes with being perceived as male, because now people are subconsciously treating me as a potential predator. All strangers, no matter their gender, keep their guard up around me.

> It made me realize that there is no inherent camaraderie in male socialization as there is in female socialization — unless, of course, it's in very specific environments. And the fact I don't ambiently experience this mutual kinship in basic exchanges anymore is an insanely lonely feeling.

> You know how badly this would have fucked my mind up if I had grown up with this?

## a fast-forwarded generation

One idea while reading the book, the idea factory: there are one generation that is fast-forwarded right after the transistor, computer and telecomm are produced. the computer as a machine is so different from industrial machines before, it changed so many things and so many ways of living for the society. so many things happened in such a short period, people are emotionally compressed or starved. the experience is intense. the time to process these experience is not enough. look at the schools, offices, and other workplaces. efficiency is prioritized. human is sacrificed, isn't it?
 
## the past has the power over the future

> Everyone faces the future with their eyes firmly on the past, and they don’y see what’s going to happen next. -- John R. Pierce (1910-2002)

## two-player game theory: a man and his world

Multiple-player game theory is difficult in one sense. But the two-player theory should be much simplified. One assumption may be that one player is more rational than the other. Or perhaps both players with the same-level rationalityis easier to reason.

If this has already been worked out in the field of game theory, then it could serve as a strategy guide for personal philosophy. Here a more realistic view of the local world is required, a strategy to work out a path is needed too. The past will hold the future like Markov chain.

## what should you eat more?

The earlier you read, the more you should eat. The later, the less if not at all.

* Green leafy vegetables: kale, collards, greens, spinach, lettuce
* other vegetables: green/red peppers, squash, carrots, broccoli, celery, potatoes, peas, etc.
* berries, 
* nuts, 
* olive oil, 
* butter & margarine, 
* cheese, 
* whole grains, 
* fish, 
* beans, 
* poultry, 
* read meat and products, 
* fast fried foods, 
* pastries & sweets, wine

Source: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4581900/table/T1/

