---
title: "market watch 2026"
date: 2026-01-19T09:57:14-07:00
tags: ["market", "politics", "dobzhansky", "ray dalio"]
draft: false
---

> Theodosius Dobzhansky: Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution.

### 2026-02-03: market down after record high

* Bitcoin down to 76K, Oil up bit, both gold and silver up. SP500=6924, Dow=49290, Nasdaq=23207, all down 

### 2026-01-30: gold fell 8% to below $5K from $5595. silver down 17% to $95. bitcoin down to $83K

* Jan 31: Bitcoin fell to $80K. Then about $77K @ 0828PM UTC Jan31,2026, gold $4902 at London. Gold-future April around $4K7. 

* Feb 01: During the weekend, Bitcoin slipped below $76,000 in thin weekend trading, dropping about 40% from its 2025 peak and revisiting levels last seen in the aftermath of the “Liberation Day” tariff fallout.

### 2026-01-23: Gold-$4949, Sliver above $100 for the first time

In the late afternoon, gold future rises above $5K for the first time. what an uncertain world!

### 2026-01-22: Gold=$4863, Bitcoin=89K, S&P500=6K9, Dow=49K

* Guess there's been an ongoing diversification away from US assets after Orange2.0. Gold is used in two ways against fiat currencies (inflation) and US dollars (uncertainty).

* Besides trade war, there's a capital war. "If there's a military move, it has capital-war implication." Ray Dalio said at WEF Davos 2026. “Fiat currencies and debt as a storehold of wealth are not being held by central banks in the same way,” Dalio said. “The biggest market to move last year was gold — far better than the tech markets.”

* Today Intel will report its quarterly earnings after market. Intel down 15% after market. Next day Intel, INTC, fell about 14%.

### 2026-01-21: Gold $4850

* Gold down to $4650 from $47K, then jumped over $4850. 

* Bitcoin down to 88K~89K. 

* Netflix afterhour down 5%, now about -7% to $81 after earning with lower guidance and uncertainty of Warner Brother deal. After opening, it stayed around $85.

* Now Treasury yields rose to their highest level in four months. "sell America" triggerred by tariffs over Greenland.

* Before the market close, TACO again.
 
### 2026-01-20: Gold $4700

* US stocks posted hefty losses early Tuesday after President Orange reignited trade-war tensions with Europe over Greenland, while a Japan-led global bond sell-off reverberated through markets. Gold rose past $4700 per ounce to record high. The 40-year rate of Japanese bonds rocketed past 4% to a fresh high since its debut in 2007 and a first for any maturity of the nation’s sovereign debt in more than three decades. 

### 2016-01-19: Greenland crisis

* Gold and silver jumped to record high. Gold up 2% to $4,677 per ounce. Silver up 4.4% to $94. Bitcoin is down to 92K from 97K high. the background is that Orange pushed to take over Greenland and threated to add tariffs on eight European nations including France, Germany, and the UK that opposed the plan to acquire Greenland. 10% on Feb 1 and 25% in June.

* Futures on S&P500 down 1%, Dow Jones Average down 0.8% and Nasdaq100 fell 1.3%.

* Iran protests linked to the volatility of oil price.

* Japanese Prime Minister Sanae Takaichi said she would dissolve parliament this week ahead of a snap election on February 8, hoping for a stronger mandate to push through her ambitious policy agenda.

* European countries own $8T in US bonds. ahead of U.S. midterm elections, noting that the administration is focused on bringing down inflation and Treasury yields -- areas where Europe may have influence. a weaponization of capital? let's look beyond the debt market. the collapse of Democracy in the US and the rise of US oligarchs?

