---
title: "A Change Is Gonna Come"
date: 2026-05-05T07:18:04-06:00
tags: ["sam cooke"]
draft: false
---

### A Change Is Gonna Come, 1964 R&B by Sam Cooke

Check out [violinist Charles Yang 2024/2025 version](https://www.classicfm.com/discover-music/instruments/violin/sam-cooke-change-gonna-come-vocal-duet/) with Dallas symphony orchestra

```
[Verse 1]
I was born by the river
In a little tent
Oh, and just like the river, I've been runnin'
Ever since

[Chorus]
It's been a long
A long time comin', but I know
A change gon' come
Oh, yes, it will

[Verse 2]
It's been too hard livin'
But I'm afraid to die
'Cause I don't know what's up there
Beyond the sky

[Chorus]

[Verse 3]
I go to the movie
And I go downtown
Somebody keep tellin' me
"Don't hang around"

[Chorus]

[Verse 4]
Then I go to my brother
And I say, "Brother, help me please"
But he winds up
Knockin' me
Back down on my knees
Lor', there been times that I thought
I couldn't last for long
But now, I think I'm able to
Carry on

[Chorus]
It's been a long
A long time comin', but I know
A change gon' come
Oh, yes, it will
```

### history of philosophy by Dr. Leonard Peikoff

1. Heraclitus

Heraclitus, pre-Socratic around 500BC. the cconcept of change. change requires the existence of contradictions. So everything Heraclitus held is changing. Everything is changing, in every respect, at every instant. Nothing ever remains the same in any way, in any respect for two consecutive instances. **No man can ever step twice into the same river.** **Everything flows, nothing abides.** That's one. And the other is, **nothing is, everything is becoming.**

2. Plato

Plato 427 to 347BC. Plato agreed with Heraclitus on many crucial points. He agreed that this world in which we live is a stream of change without entities. He agreed that this world in which we live is riddled with contradictions. He agreed that our senses are invalid and do not yield a knowledge of reality. So on all those respects, Plato was a good Heraclitian.

If there are no entities in this world, there must be another world where we can find stable, enduring entities. If change involves a contradiction, which he granted, he said, well, but contradictions can't exist in true reality. And therefore, true reality must be a realm without change. It must consist of completely immutable, completely motionless, changeless, and therefore consistent, non-contradictory entities. And he reasoned, since our senses are invalid, if true reality is to be knowable, it can't be the kind of world that is known by the senses. In other words, it can't be physical or material in nature, because if it were physical, you could only know it by the senses, and yet the senses are invalid. So, if knowledge of reality is to be possible, he concluded, reality must be completely non-sensory, non-physical, non-material, knowable by some means completely different from sense perception.

In short, he concluded, true reality must be composed of a set of immutable, which means unchanging, immutable non-material entities. Well, now, this raises the question, what sort of entities comprises true reality in Plato's opinion?

The reality is single, but the image is multiple. The reality is perfect, the image is distorted. The reality is motionless, the image is in constant motion. Well, for Plato, that is essentially the relation of true reality to our physical world. The physical world is just a set of multiple whirling distorted images given off by the true motionless non-material reality, the world of forms. Now, that is a brief summary of Plato's metaphysics, his view of reality, and it is technically referred to as a metaphysics of idealism. Plato's world of universals is non-material.

Plato agreed with the skeptics, you couldn't achieve knowledge of this world, but nevertheless of true reality, of the world of forms or universal. But the question is, how? He had to confront the question, how can we here on earth, limited by our senses and our bodies, ever come into contact with the perfect non-material world of forms or universals?

Well, Plato's answer is that in this life, we have no direct means of contacting the forms. But he says that is not a problem, because our souls existed prior to this life and inhabited the world of forms. And at that time, each of our souls actually came in contact with and knew all universals and therefore all laws, all principles, they were actually in effect omniscient, each of our souls in this previous life. And all of that knowledge is still in each one of us now. Now, of course, we may not be conscious of the knowledge that we possess, or at least have great portions of it.

3. Aristole


### 韵争

```
南来客:
韵争近体古今间，一部金科重若山
意境非关平水事，风流未过水平关

M君：
痴心不敢误诗名，诸事中年摆未平。
转向书灯穷白首，耳边能起古潮声。

南来客:
诗词不在一虚名，言志抒情道不平。
君看如斯东逝水，滔滔非是旧时声。

M君：
网上一逢心自倾，九年衣带废皴平。
肯将长夜推敲事，换得字中唐宋声。
```

* [两由之 文学城](https://blog.wenxuecity.com/myblog/58857/201703/7615.html)

* [南来客 海外文轩](https://www.overseaswindow.com/home/writer/1989)

### [ich bin ein Berliner, by JFK, 1963](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ich_bin_ein_Berliner)

* [English text by JFK](https://www.files.ethz.ch/isn/125399/1160_KennedyIchbin.pdf)

> Freedom has many difficulties and democracy is not perfect, but we have never had to put a wall up to keep our people in, to prevent them from leaving us. 

> 自由有许多困难，民主亦非完美，然而我们从来不用建造一堵墙把我们的人民关在里面，不准他们离开我们。

> All free men, wherever they may live, are citizens of Berlin, and, therefore, as a free man, I take pride in the words "Ich bin ein Berliner."

> 一切自由人，不论他们住在何方，皆是柏林市民，所以作为一个自由人，我为“Ich bin ein Berliner”这句话感到自豪。

### books

* The Obamians: The Struggle Inside the White House to Redefine American Power, by [James Mann](https://james-mann.com) 

